---
layout: one-column
title: An Interview with Robert King (2001)
---

<p>In 2001, Eileen Sullivan, for the summer  issue of <em>The South Dakota Review,</em> interviewed Robert King who&rsquo;d previously had several poems and an essay in <em>SDR, </em>along with five poems in that  issue. At the conclusion, the two poems mentioned in the interview are  re-printed, although they were not among the five printed in that issue. </p>
<p>SDR: <em>You  have worked and written during most of your career in this general region of  the country. Is this where you were raised, and what is your view of region&rsquo;s  influence on writing, and upon writing?</em></p>
<p><em>RK: </em>It&rsquo;s  easy to overstate the influence of region on a writer, but it&rsquo;s probably easy  to understate it, too. Maybe it&rsquo;s just difficult to determine I don&rsquo;t think of  Frost primarily as a New England wrier but  obviously that environment&mdash;physical, social, and emotional&mdash;plays a large role  in his work. Or it&rsquo;s given a large role by his work. In my case, I grew up and  spent most of life within a couple hundred miles one way or the other of the  Central/Mountain Time division&mdash;my first full-length manuscript was called <em>Central Mountain Time</em>&mdash;so I knew the Rocky Mountains as well as the high plains and then the  prairie. </p>
<p>I&rsquo;d say the specific impacts this region  had on me were two-fold: the main one was simply nature itself. My family hiked  and camped and I&rsquo;ve always felt the profound presence of nature. In early  college, I thought of myself as nature poet, writing descriptions of &ldquo;mountain  beauty,&rdquo; that kind of thing. I got interested in the history of the prairie and  the west and the fact that a lot of it was invisible. I mean in Philadelphia you can walk  up to the place where something happened; in the prairie and west it&rsquo;s a bit  more ambiguous. It was here, it was over there, it was around here somewhere.  You can visit the bar in Deadwood where Wild Bill died but since the town  burned after that and they moved the buildings forward, the exact spot is under  the asphalt parking lot behind the bar. And you can see time happening in the  plains and the west&mdash;erosion, weather, gains and loss&mdash;very clearly, It think. A  lot of my poems have to do with time and/or with nature so that&rsquo;s been partly  the effect of my &ldquo;region.&rdquo;&nbsp; </p>
<p>William Kloefkorn, in an issue of <em>The Midwest Quarterly</em> a few years ago,  started the introductory essay off with &ldquo;The Great Plains is a town of about  700 semi-warm bodies in south-=central Kansas,&rdquo;  which is where he grew up. I love the idea of localizing the local that  way.&nbsp; But later on he says the poet hopes  to &ldquo;move beyond and rise above&rdquo; the details of those local geographies. Let me  look up the ending of that essay for a moment: &ldquo;Like any local, the Great Plains can give the writer something substantial to  move away from while in fact not altogether moving away.&rdquo;&nbsp; That&rsquo;s true of any region, any locale, seems  to me. It&rsquo;s a very familiar paradox, that back and forth.</p>
<p><em>SDR:  Are there other regional writers whose works express their region well who may  have influenced you? Are there drawbacks to this concept of regionalism for  writers?</em></p>
<p>RK: Well, I&rsquo;m  not that conscious of influences, nor did I think of myself as particularly  regional. I just wrote about what was around me and out of whom I was, and I  thought everybody did it. If &ldquo;region&rdquo; has to do with subject matter and  perspective and style, I think Frank O&rsquo;Hara is a wonderful regional writer of Manhattan. But I mainly  think he&rsquo;s wonderful.</p>
<p>But I do have deep respect for the  writers I read who write out of the material of their own environment, like  Sydney Lea in New England, Linda Hasselstrom in the Dakotas, Twyla Hansen or  Marge Saiser in&nbsp; Nebraska, along with, of  course, Kloefkorn and Ted Kooser. But&mdash;to take those four Nebraskans as a case  in point&mdash;there&rsquo;s not a lot in common among them. I mean, you would never  confuse one writer with another. Regarding nature poets&mdash;maybe that&rsquo;s a kind of  regionalism in itself&mdash;I love Pattiann Rogers and worship Mary Oliver&rsquo;s sounds  and images. Earlier, for me, it was Gary Snyder. But in none of these cases  would I call them &ldquo;influences.&rdquo; I think my influences came from other areas of  poetry, other poets. </p>
<p>Is there a drawback to the concept of  regionalism? Oh, sure. I think if it gets to be a genre label&mdash;&ldquo;Oh, he writes  Midwestern regionalism&rdquo; or &ldquo;She&rsquo;s a northern California environmentalist poet&rdquo; or  whatever&mdash;that has drawbacks, but that&rsquo;s mainly done by the critics or the  public, I think, not the writer. It could also be a negative concept if a  writer saw it like joining a club, trying to write a certain way to fit in with  others in his state or region.</p>
<p>SDR: What changes do you see in poetry&rsquo;s  position in American culture today versus throughout the last century and when  you were first writing poetry? What rends in American poetry have you noticed  and which do you believe are bearing the best fruit?</p>
<p>RK: Changes in poetry&rsquo;s position in America? Wow, I  have no good answers for that. I tend to believe what any persuasive writer  tells me at any given moment: it was better then when poets were respected and  admired, or it&rsquo;s better now that there&rsquo;s a lot more diversity in poetry and  more excitement and more publishing, or is it less? No, it&rsquo;s not, yes, it is,  that kind of thing. </p>
<p>When I first began writing poetry in the  &lsquo;50s, Dylan Thomas was a headliner. Not too much later on, Allen Ginsberg was  famous. I mention that because measuring the &ldquo;position&rdquo; of something in our  culture often has to do with fame. Thomas was the Shelly of the &lsquo;40s and &lsquo;50s,  Ginsberg was the Tennyson of the &lsquo;60s and &lsquo;70s. So there are individuals who  command public attention, and yet most of poetry continues on under the radar  screen, and I really don&rsquo;t know why that would have been any different a  century ago. </p>
<p>Regarding trends and which ones I think  are &ldquo;bearing the best fruit,&rdquo; I probably don&rsquo;t have much original to offer. I&rsquo;m  64 now and in my lifetime I&rsquo;ve seen the modernist camp split between Eliot and  Williams&mdash;I mean the effect of that on poets years later, the issue of American  immediate experience versus British mediated experience. And I got to see the  blossoming of personal experience when Robert Lowell&rsquo;s <em>Life Studies</em> came out and Snodgrass&rsquo;s <em>Heart&rsquo;s Needle</em> won the Pulitzer. Then I got to see the reaction to  that. </p>
<p>The discussions, more or less current,  about formalism or non-formalism don&rsquo;t excite me at all, but I bet they feel  exciting to younger writers and that&rsquo;s fine. We&nbsp;  used to spend nights arguing who got into <em>New Poets of England and America</em> and who didn&rsquo;t, that whole period  of the &ldquo;anthology wars,&rdquo; but I&rsquo;ll leave those battles to the young.</p>
<p>In my opinion, the general trend with the  &ldquo;best fruit,&rdquo; to use your phrase, is trying to bring more into a poem than the  singular experience. Some call it multiple perspectives or a disjunctive  rhetoric or the meditative approach. I can&rsquo;t really describe it, but powerful  examples are Charles Wright and the later Larry Levis. I&rsquo;m in admiration of  their works. That constitutes a way out of excessive personalism, or the  self-indulgence which marks some contemporary poetry. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  You teach, so you probably have met students who expect you to persuade them of  the value of poetry. How do you answer when they ask: what purpose does poetry  have? What are some of your biggest challenges in working with your student  poets?</em></p>
<p>RK: Fewer students ask what is the  purpose of poetry than try to tell me what it is, actually. But, yes, sometimes  there&rsquo;s a certain doubt about what this is all about. It&rsquo;s an experience, I  tell them, like any other. I may have gotten this general idea from something  Susan Sontag wrote, I don&rsquo;t remember, but an art work is an experience like  other experiences in life. A poem is an experience like a walk in the rain is,  like a movie is, like camping overnight, an opera, and wind-surfing are. And  here&rsquo;s how to have this experience of poetry&mdash;try it and see what you think.  There are ways to have very good walks in the rain or hikes and ways to have  very good readings of poems.</p>
<p>I certainly don&rsquo;t want to get into  telling people why poetry is good for them. It&rsquo;s an experience of a certain  kind, and certain experiences are immensely enjoyable and life-affirming and  perspective-changing, and that&rsquo;s what poems are for. When I teach writing, I  prefer to teach the beginning sections rather than graduate students&mdash;after some  development it all seems like personal choice to me, not a matter of teaching  and learning&mdash;and so the biggest challenges are the two wrong assumptions  beginning poets often make. One is that poetry is general and abstract, rather  than specific and concrete, and the other is that a poem means anything you  think it does. I have a theory that the teaching of poetry in the secondary  school must further this misapprehension, if it doesn&rsquo;t cause it completely.  But once you get over those two hurdles, it&rsquo;s pretty much a matter of  development, though it does take some students a long time to get over there. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  Does an awareness of an audience have an effect upon your poetry? Are there  audiences you imagine as you write that encourage the creative process, and are  there audiences you dread thinking about as your write? What would you like  readers to take from your poems?</em></p>
<p>RK&rdquo;: I really don&rsquo;t think of an audience  as I write. I think of a reader, which may be different, or maybe that&rsquo;s what  some people mean by audience. To me the concept of audience involves certain  thematic interests a writer might identify&mdash;rural life, or example, or art and  philosophy---along with tastes and habits which the writer then writes to, or  maybe, in another kind of poetry, tries to violate. Writing for the select few,  or the generally educated, or the so-called common man.</p>
<p>I think a reader just reads a poem, and  I&rsquo;ve very aware of my poems as meant-to-be-read. I may use an informal diction  but that&rsquo;s because that&rsquo;s what I want to read in my poetry, not because I&rsquo;m  trying to write for an audience that prefers simple diction. I really don&rsquo;t  think of preferred or dreaded audiences. </p>
<p>I can&rsquo;t, myself, imagine an audience per  se that would encourage the creative process, but maybe I&rsquo;m not understanding  the question. Carol Bly said something to the effect that to write you had to  kill the parent and the small-town neighbor and the clergyman inside  yourself&mdash;that is, you couldn&rsquo;t think of them as an audience if you were going  to be creative. I do expect a reader not to be prim and stiff, to be able to  roll with the language, but that&rsquo;s just being generally sensitive. I have what  may be the same problem in answering what I&rsquo;d like readers to take from my  poems. I want them to take the language that has been created and have an  experience with it. That&rsquo;s all. Sure, I want them to get the humor, swoon over  the profound parts, feel satisfied at the end, like they&rsquo;ve been somewhere, but  I imagine every poet wants that.</p>
<p><em>SDR:  Could we talk briefly about your method/work habits&hellip;when you write, how you  write (longhand/computer), where you write. Do you think the manner of  composition affects the writing?</em></p>
<p>RK: My poems often begin as notes or  lines handwritten at the time I think of them. Then I select something to  type&mdash;I should say &ldquo;word-process,&rdquo; what a verb!&mdash;sometimes leaving them as notes,  sometimes continuing with the image or thought on the computer. If something  really seems promising, I&rsquo;ll print that out and hand-write revisions; if it  seems promising but I&rsquo;m not sure what the promise is, I&rsquo;ll put it in a folder  label &ldquo;current work,&rdquo; somehow ending up with three or four such folders&mdash;I have  one now called &ldquo;Lately&rdquo; because I had too many &ldquo;Current Work&rdquo; ones&mdash;so I have to  winnow stuff out, consolidate others, that kind of thing. I write first drafts  mostly in the morning and usually &ldquo;out somewhere&rdquo;&mdash;a coffee shop, library,  student union, often my office. Some revision work can be done at any time of  day. What inspires me&mdash;I&rsquo;m leery of using that word because of its sometimes  grand connotations&mdash;is often a visual image, sometimes a whole experience, and  sometimes a piece of language itself that sounds inviting. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  I am also very interested in knowing what other art forms most influence you or  inspire you&hellip;music? painting? sculpture? What music do you listen to, etc.</em></p>
<p>RK: Other art forms are very important  to me, primarily music. I listen to classical music almost all the time on a  public radio station while I write or read, instrumental music. I don&rsquo;t have a  good feel for vocal music anyway and I think the words distract me. Music was the  first art that attracted me as a child and I played and replayed family records  like Dvorak&rsquo;s &ldquo;New World Symphony&rdquo; and &ldquo;Sing, Sing, Sing&rdquo; from Benny Goodman&rsquo;s  1938 Carnegie Hall concert.&nbsp; I love to  listen to classical music while I drive and watch the connections the music  makes with the landscape. If I were to be honest, many of my poems would be  called &ldquo;Driving Through Landscape While Listening to Music&rdquo; and then just a  number. I also love visual art, always try to see shows or museums, but I don&rsquo;t  write much about visual art. I come close to thinking it&rsquo;s cheating, although  I&rsquo;m willing to admit it&rsquo;s not. It&rsquo;s a prejudice of mine, I guess. Usually I  find poems about particular works of art mainly working because of the imagery  and idea of the other artist&rsquo;s work. That famous Auden poem, &ldquo;Breughel&rsquo;s  Icarus,&rdquo; is a huge example of a poem that doesn&rsquo;t do that. But a lot of what I  read seems to be just nicely written descriptions of the painting. So then I  think, &ldquo;Why don&rsquo;t you do your own work?&rdquo;&nbsp; </p>
<p><em>SDR:  I have a two-part question that is connected to writing and teaching. First,  how difficult is it to get the attention of a more sizable publisher, even a  university press, to put out a collection of poems? And second, I notice that  over the years you have had what looks like very labor-intensive teaching  positions. I am wondering how much the demands on you to carry full teaching  loads over the years has taken away from your time to write. I seems clear to  me that in order for your poems to get the kind of attention they deserve,  you&rsquo;d have to lighten up your teaching load and devote time to marketing your  own work, which is tedious in the best of circumstances, and virtually  impossible for a writer who also is teaching the kinds of loads you have  carried over the years.</em></p>
<p>RK: Thanks for implying that my work  should get more attention. I think there are two factors involved in where I am  today, older, with magazine publications and chapbooks, but no full-length  book. One is that most of my life I was very involved in teaching and the  people I&rsquo;d meet the next day in class came before the invisible readers who  might interact with a possible poem. Of course, the academic life is full of a  lot of other time demands, and I was never good at resisting those. And, of course,  understand that I published professional articles in journals such as <em>Language Arts, Writing Teacher, </em>and <em>Action in Teacher Education</em>, along with  lots of presentations at NCTE and IRA national&nbsp;  conferences and others, as well as being a writer-in-the-schools for  several years and developing a K-12 curriculum guide for creative writing in North Dakota. I felt all  those things were important, too. Now that I&rsquo;ve moved on from that full-time  involvement with education, I&rsquo;ve had more success with poetry&mdash;two chapbooks in  four years won competitions and were published.</p>
<p>The second factor has to do with the  tremendous competition for book-publication. I once entered a contest for a  first book of poetry, thus excluding anyone who had published a book of poems,  anyone who didn&rsquo;t have fifty of sixty poems ready, and anyone who didn&rsquo;t happen  to read the ad for that contest which was not a major one. They had 1,600  entrants, I was told later. So there&rsquo;s a lot of competition. That intense  competition, I think, favors a book which is very singular and focused&mdash;a theme  album, if you well, not just &ldquo;my best fifty poems&rdquo;&mdash;and it doesn&rsquo;t hurt if  there&rsquo;s something unique like your father&rsquo;s dying or even exotic like your year  in India. My work may appear or be a bit more familiar, a bit lost in the  crowd. But I&rsquo;m growing and continuing, changing as I change.<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; <br />
Another element, I think, is that  people, even me, like a certain singularity in poetry books. Not <em>Here Are the Beatles</em> but <em>Sergeant Pepper&rsquo;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&mdash;</em>the  theme album idea. And I often seem to be writing different kinds of things at  the same time. Bill Stafford said of an early chapbook of mine that there was a  surprising variety to the poems, and he meant it as a compliment, but I also  think it can be a drawback. A lot of readers don&rsquo;t want to have to ask, &ldquo;Now  what the hell is this?&rdquo; as they start each new poem. I&rsquo;d like more people to  read my work, of course, and public readings are important&mdash;I must read fairly  well because I get a great reaction from audiences&mdash;but, let&rsquo;s face it, that&rsquo;s  not why one sits down and starts out a poem about something one&rsquo;s seen on the  street that morning. </p>
<p><em>SER:  Criticism and theory is a necessary part of both the academic&rsquo;s and the poet&rsquo;s  life. What influence does this have upon your work if any?</em></p>
<p>RK: I&rsquo;ve never kept up much on critical  or theoretical issues, except by osmosis through friends or people I found  interesting. My first academic introduction to poetry was, at the University of Iowa, <em>Understanding Poetry</em> by Brooks and Warren, and I&rsquo;m sure I&rsquo;ve  carried some New Criticism perspectives with me all my life, the value of the  words of the poem, the poem as a wrought urn rather than a spontaneous yelp or  an artifact of the poet&rsquo;s life. Of course, some urns can be wrought a little  more causally or freely than others. And now that I&rsquo;ve used the phrase  &ldquo;well-wrought urn&rdquo; I find I want to disavow it for its static, non-organic  implications. But still I&rsquo;m sure that was a critical tenet I carried with me.&nbsp; Several years ago, I did ask a colleague to  help introduce me to deconstruction and post-modernism in general, and then I  decided I could pass. I think critical theories are much more important as  methods of reading literature than of creating it. I&rsquo;m mainly influence by the  actual poems of other poets. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  What poets of the last 50 years have exerted the greatest influence upon you?</em></p>
<p>RK: Well, since I admitted being  influenced by other poets now I have to name them? I&rsquo;m a little uneasy about  wording a possible answer since the phrase &ldquo;I feel I&rsquo;ve been influenced by the  work of,&rdquo; and then you name a famous person, seems self-important, an attempt  to justify one&rsquo;s writing by means of someone else. Or you&rsquo;re so hot you&rsquo;re  taking just a little of John Donne and little of someone else.</p>
<p>But it is certainly easy to say that I  learned a lot from William Carlos Williams&rsquo; work about imagery, perspective,  tone, phrasing and lots more. Don Justice was a teacher of mine, and I&rsquo;ve  always admired his work although right off the bat now you have two poets it  might be hard to imagine together. Denise Levertov, there&rsquo;s another whose books  I&rsquo;d sit down with in a second to enjoy over and over and, in a very different  way, Robert Bly. Berryman certainly has been an influence for his tone and  serious flippancy in <em>The Dram Songs</em>.  I&rsquo;m not saying I try to do that, but have that rhythms and diction solidly in  my head. Frank O&rsquo;Hara is another, and I&rsquo;ve mentioned the lush intensity of Mary  Oliver&mdash;I&rsquo;d love to be influenced by her work. Oh, okay, here&rsquo;s one guy I read  over and over, looked forward to his next book, the whole thing: James Wright.  Wow. <em>The Branch Will Not Break</em> was a  very pivotal book for me in its imagery and, matter of fact, in its  regionality. I&rsquo;m making up a word so I don&rsquo;t have to say regionalism. But you  can see this list doesn&rsquo;t really add up to a single unified thing, nor was I  ever thinking &ldquo;This is an O&rsquo;Hara line, that&rsquo;s a Wright stanza,&rdquo; et cetera. I  can&rsquo;t tell what&rsquo;s in my poetry in relation to influences&mdash;that&rsquo;d be for someone  else to figure out. Or maybe I just don&rsquo;t want to spend time that way. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  Is the image still as central to poetry as it was during much of the 20th  century, or have poets moved to other concerns? How important is it to your  work?</em></p>
<p>RK: I think the image has been very  important to my work since the beginning, and very important to poetry during  the 20th century, but I think it&rsquo;s obviously changed. With the first  Imagists, it was Pound&rsquo;s &ldquo;emotional and intellectual complex&rdquo; at a moment in  time and I think that seems fairly worn by now. Or, if you want to really  compare it, go back to the early Imagists, some of the early poems in <em>Poetry</em> under Monroe in the mid-teens and  twenties: some of those are really pompous or self-conscious or over the top&mdash;I  remember one comparing the moon to a full diaper in the sky, for Pete&rsquo;s sake!  Williams is the master of the image, although &ldquo;The Red Wheelbarrow&rdquo; for all the  fun and fuming it causes among undergraduates is much less important for me  than <em>Paterson</em>. Now that is a book&mdash;wow. And  that&rsquo;s not just a series of images alone but a continuous stream of thought. <em>Paterson</em> is the American <em>Four Quartets</em>, in my  opinion. I think it knocks &ldquo;The Wasteland&rdquo; off the map. And I&rsquo;m afraid nobody  reads it any more. The image now is still there solidly and still connected  with thought, although somewhat more &ldquo;personal&rdquo; thought, even when it gets  cosmic. I&rsquo;m thinking here of Charles Wright and Larry Levis. I think a lot of  my early work focused on the single image, the complex of the moment; now I think  I&rsquo;m trying to push further, get more multiplicity in a single poem.</p>
<p><em>SDR:  What part of the process of writing poetry still challenges you the most? How  do you know when a poem is finished? How long, on average, does it take for you  to bring a poem to completion?</em></p>
<p>RK: What still &ldquo;challenges&rdquo; me in  writing a poem? I love that word. The first thing coming to mind may be  important: omitting things in revision which I loved when I first wrote them. I  love them in there so much I sometimes deny for a long time what they&rsquo;re doing  in the poem. And it&rsquo;s sometimes difficult for me to keep from pounding a poem  into place to fit my original intention or impression. I know the poem itself  is the most important thing, but sometimes I pretend that&rsquo;s not the case this time.  Knowing a poem is finished may be another one of my challenges or, rather,  making a poem be finished before it wants to, or after it&rsquo;s ended. But in  general I think what convinces a poet the poem has ended is a combination of  rhythm and language&mdash;you feel something&rsquo;s been summed up without a summary, or  another image or metaphor has suddenly come out of the material that gives a  sense of closure.</p>
<p>How long to complete a poem? Mary  Oliver&rsquo;s very specific on this: I think she says seventy-two to seventy-six  hours, something specific, for a poem to come to light. I&rsquo;d love to be able to  say something like that. I suppose there&rsquo;s an average of, say, a dozen writings  for a poem, but that&rsquo;s probably a median that no poem occupies. I was trying to  find something between three and twenty. Ted Kooser told me he writes something  and puts it away for three weeks or so before working on it. I&rsquo;d like to be  able to do that, but I usually can&rsquo;t resist jumping on it immediately. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  What has changed the most in your poems over the years? Has your motivation for  writing a poem changed?</em></p>
<p>RK: What has changed the most? I think  what I referred to earlier: the move from the single image to the more  complicated, or more multiple poem. My motivation? Well, I think a lot of years  I wrote because I had certain experiences, saw certain things, wrote out of  personal emotions and moods. Now I feel I&rsquo;m working more with the outside world  or just &ldquo;the world.&rdquo; I see myself as finding things in the world and bringing  them up for experience and examination, like finding stones in a stream. I was  too self-centered when I was young; and a lot of the young today are, too. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  Your poems make use of a lot of rhythms and diction of natural speech, and the  essay of yours we ran in </em>SDR<em> last summer </em>[&quot;Grass  Land Water&quot; which became a chapter in <em>Stepping  Twice into the River, </em>University Press of Colorado, 2005] <em>used a lot of poetic turns of phrase. How conscious is this  on&nbsp; your part, and what do you think this  suggests about poetry today?</em></p>
<p>RK: Well, one thing is that I&rsquo;ve come  late to literary prose, so the learning curve has really been excitingly high.  It was amazing, after years of writing poetry and passable academic prose, to  plunge into literary prose and write some of the worst sentences I&rsquo;ve ever  seen! I probably turned to some feel for poetic rhythm and combination to help  me into and through prose. I found prose much more &ldquo;freeing&rdquo; because it didn&rsquo;t  have that connection to the line&mdash;it was more the sentence furling and  unfurling. Yeah, that was conscious, I guess, or maybe &ldquo;helpless.&rdquo; I&rsquo;m often  doing anything I can in a piece of prose&mdash;including intense repetition,  parallelism, the quick-cut, the long sentence, the short one, the shift in  diction all that&mdash;to stay with the idea in language and not fall out of it, or  off of it. Prose would be my version of wind-surfing. Of course, today is the  day of inter-genre, isn&rsquo;t it? And prose poetry has its own magazines and  anthologies and everything! I think it&rsquo;s great to work in all those forms and inter-forms  and non-forms. It&rsquo;s also pretty obvious that there are about as many kinds of  prose-poems as there are prose-poets, so it&rsquo;s a fairly open form.</p>
<p>SDR: One thing I enjoy about your poems  is this apparent incongruence between a mythically and historically significant  past and an unheroic or just plain silly present America. Perhaps you could talk  about this quality in your work.</p>
<p>RK: What an interesting way to put  it&mdash;the mythic past and the plain old silly present? First, that&rsquo;s what it  always seems like, doesn&rsquo;t it? You go to a lecture on Lewis and Clark and then  you&rsquo;re driving home and complaining about the traffic? That difference or irony  or juxtaposition has got to hit you. The past is often presented in that solemn  way and the present sometimes seems less. I have one of the two photographs  taken of my grandparents in their life; the younger generation has video tapes  of their parties, or rolls of instantly developed Polaroids in which everybody  is making a face. I&rsquo;m always aware of this contrast, and know it&rsquo;s significant,  but also it&rsquo;s only a partial truth. I have an old movie film my uncle took of  my mother in college with his sisters, who are pantomiming playing violins in  an orchestra, really hamming it up, laughing. Our ancestors were that way, too.  So how big is the difference? We can&rsquo;t really now. But the main reason may be  that I myself often feel silly and personal and irrelevant in the present when  faced with a vast prairie scene or some echo of two generations earlier.</p>
<p><em>SDR:  I often see in your poems an amused and irreverent tone used almost  simultaneously with an element of awe about the wonders of science and nature  reality. What is this fascination with science in your work? </em></p>
<p>RK: Yeah, I think I do that&mdash;I&rsquo;ll own  that light irreverence and that awe both. Down deep, it may be that I am  basically an irreverent and easily amused person who&rsquo;s dealing with subjects of  wonder and awe, and I&rsquo;m trying to get both aspects in. I feel a tremendous tug  from nature&mdash;I almost lose myself in it&mdash;but I don&rsquo;t want to get romantic or  sentimental so I try to get the scientific aspect in to show I know what&rsquo;s  what. A Freudian might wonder about a poet whose father was a science teacher  in high school and then a chemistry teacher in college, a poet who went into  English as his mother had and did very poorly in chemistry. But I&rsquo;m not a  Freudian. The fact is my father taught me at a very early age what made up  granite, why the rocks of Colorado were slanted that way, the sense of geologic  time, all that, and I thought that was amazing as a child, and I still do. It  shows you that nature is not a pretty background for our picnics. I was always  impressed by the stunning distances and times involved in the universe. </p>
<p><em>SDR:  In the poem &ldquo;<a href="#light">Treatise on Light</a>,&rdquo; you start with a scientific fact (again, your  interest in science coming through), and work toward a contemplation of how  science both explains and reveals human and scientific reality. You start a lot  of your poems with an anchor in some bit of scientific data and then move into  broader philosophical considerations. Why is this strategy so prevalent in your  work?</em></p>
<p>RK: &ldquo;<a href="#light">Treatise on Light</a>&rdquo;&mdash;Well, I start  some poems with a bit of data because that bit of data blew me away. Imagine  the difference between a kid who&rsquo;s told that stars are the angels of God or  something and another kid who gets told, &ldquo;You know, some of those stars aren&rsquo;t  even there anymore.&rdquo; That&rsquo;s got to make a different in how a 9-year-old looks  out his window at night, doesn&rsquo;t it?</p>
<p>And then that first stanza brings in a  completely crude human experience, urinating at night under the stars in the  mountains, and that&rsquo;s a very real aspect but a very real contrast. And, notice  something else: the second stanza starts with a personal experience with  religion. My father was a science teacher and went to a conservative Baptist  church&mdash;put those two things together!</p>
<p>There&rsquo;s another contrast. I haven&rsquo;t used  religion much in my poetry, but I can tell it&rsquo;s starting to come in here and  there. But&nbsp; always as a contrast with  something else. And then, yes, I try to move into some broader consideration.  This is a prevalent structure in my poems because it&rsquo;s a prevalent structure in  my experience. I read some fact, or experience some bit of data, and then  wonder about it, move around in it, try to move beyond it. I think I like to  start with absolute reality, which has to be chemistry and physics and geology,  doesn&rsquo;t it? Maybe not the most &ldquo;im`portant&rdquo; reality for most of us, but the  rock--bottom of the material of our world. And then I try to make something out  of that.</p>
<p><em>SDR:  An other idea I see cropping up in your poem is this notion of communication  and a lack of communication occurring, as in the poem &ldquo;<a href="#table">Table Conversation</a>,&rdquo; in  which we get only the outside speaker&rsquo;s version of what might be said at a  conversation between two people the speaker can&rsquo;t hear. A good number of your  poems deal with this issue of communication and its relative strengths and  weaknesses. I&rsquo;m interested in why this idea seems to come up in so many of your  poems. </em></p>
<p>RK: Hmm, yes, another kind of contrast,  right? Communicating and/or not communicating. I can&rsquo;t give a personal reason  as to why that particular contrast would be particularly frequent with me, but  there are two easy aspects to mention. One is that communication is almost  entirely what we humans do with each other and with ourselves, so it&rsquo;s an  important element and its various successes and failures are important in our  relationships. But also poetry is a kind of communication, and it has successes  and failures as well. So poetry is surely going to take cognizance of the  difficulties of communicating. Do we really know what someone is saying to us?  That&rsquo;s a common question&mdash;a bit annoying because it&rsquo;s so general but a valid  area for philosophy and psychology, and certainly poetry, to explore. Secondly,  with my interests in the natural world I&rsquo;m constantly bouncing back and forth  in my mind from utter atheism to the rosy-glasses of Emersonian  transcendentalism. &ldquo;Every natural fact is a symbol of some spiritual fact,&rdquo; so  what does this river mean? A mountain? This, that, nothing, everything.  Nature&rsquo;s a message. No, it isn&rsquo;t. I find lots of tension in this area of man,  nature and communication, and this tension helps create art, I think, or it&rsquo;s  what art&rsquo;s made of. </p>
<h2>Poems referred to in interview:&nbsp;&nbsp; </h2>
<h3><a name="light" id="light"></a>A TREATISE ON LIGHT</h3>
<p>By now everyone knows that a star may be extinct<br />
the romantic night we see it, our hearts  glub-glubbing<br />
the way they do, but once at night in the  mountains<br />
I stepped from the cabin to relieve myself and  muttered<br />
&ldquo;Forgive me&rdquo; up to an eternal watch, being both  overwhelmed<br />
and stewed with that sensitivity drunks have for  the cosmos<br />
or anything spinning around them. That sky was  alive<br />
and personal, on the grandest of scales, and  looking down on me.</p>
<p>When I was thirteen, an evangelist promised the  Last Judgment<br />
consisted of a sky-wide movie of each poor life,  the world at large<br />
as audience which meant my girlfriend seeing what  I did alone.<br />
I would ache, I knew, for the film to jam and  curl, to burn like hell. <br />
Hearing the stars weren&rsquo;t permanent, I forgot  about eternity,<br />
having a new worry and, since I believed in  everything<br />
that made me tingle, I lay at night to watch one  wink out<br />
as I watched, but nothing was extinguished above  our house.</p>
<p>The truth, I&rsquo;ve been told recently, regarding  light we see<br />
is that stars die with a noticeable flourish of  illumination,<br />
not simply blink their pinpoints off. And this  time is so vast<br />
against the slow drag of space it would take  longer than life<br />
to watch one star brighten up and die in its  dusty afterglow<br />
which is not true, I&rsquo;ve found, of anything else  on earth<br />
where, for example, people disappear at&nbsp; the speed of light. <br />
Where darkness is they were, and where the  brightness was. </p>
<p>(<em>Naming  Names</em>, Palanquin Press, 2001)</p>
<h3><a name="table" id="table"></a>TABLE CONVERSATION OF TWO PEOPLE I CAN&rsquo;T HEAR </h3>
<p>&quot;The ocean rolls like this,&quot; he says  with his hand.<br />
Then, &quot;I have a beard. My chin is  dark.&quot; <br />
&quot;There is a circular whirlpool on my  arm,&quot;<br />
the woman with him muses, looking down.</p>
<p>&quot;My hand is wet,&quot; he replies. &quot;I  must shake it.&quot;<br />
&quot;My ear is too high,&quot; she says. &quot;I  feel its weight.&quot; <br />
&quot;Now,&rdquo; he declares authoritatively, &quot;I  must hold <br />
my head up.&quot; &quot;Here&rsquo;s one point,&quot;  he says, &quot;and there.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;The grave,&quot; she reports sadly,  &quot;was about this wide.<br />
And here is the broken church of my hands.&quot;<br />
&quot;Look how a fish swims, he says. &quot;This  way and that.&quot; <br />
&quot;These are my lips,&quot; she murmurs.  &quot;This hand half-reaches</p>
<p>to God, sand in an hour glass. These are my lips  again.&quot; <br />
&quot;A violin,&quot; he points out, &quot;is shaped  thus, and thus.&quot;<br />
&quot;These are my lips,&quot; she keeps  repeating, &quot;these are my lips.&quot;<br />
&quot;The grave,&quot; he asserts finally,  &quot;was filled up in this manner.&quot;</p>
<p>(<em>Naming  Names</em>, Palanquin Press, 2001)</p>
		